= ROD -- Ruby Object Database

* http://github.com/apohllo/rod - source code
* http://rubydoc.info/github/apohllo/rod/master/frames - API
* https://www.relishapp.com/apohllo/rod - Cucumber features

== WARNING

The 0.7.x branch is a development branch -- incompatibilities between library
releases might be introduced (both in API and data schema).
You are advised to use the latest release of 0.6.x branch.

== DESCRIPTION

ROD (Ruby Object Database) is library which aims at providing
fast access for data, which rarely changes.

== FEATURES:

* object-oriented Ruby interface
* Ruby-to-C on-the-fly translation based on mmap and RubyInline
* optimized for (reading) speed
* weak reference collections for easy memory reclaims
* Berkeley DB hash index for the best index performance
* immediate updates of hash indices
* compatibility check of library version
* compatibility check of data model
* auto-generation of model (based on the database meta-data)
* automatic model migrations (limited to addition/removal of properties and indexes)
* full update of the database (removal of objects not available yet)
* databases interlinking (via direct links or inverted indices)
* data portability between big and little-endian systems
* works on Linux and BSD

== PROBLEMS

* tested mostly on 64-bit systems
* doesn't work on Windows
* concurrent writes not supported
* batch-only data input/update
* data removal not supported

== SYNOPSIS:

ROD is designed for storing and accessing data which rarely changes.
It is an opposite of RDBMS as the data is not normalized, while
"joins" are much faster.
It is an opposite of in-memory databases, since it is designed to cover
out of core data sets (10 GB and more).

The primary reason for designing it was to create storage facility for
natural language dictionaries and corpora. The data in a fully fledged dictionary
is interconnected in many ways, thus the relational model (joins) introduces
unacceptable performance hit. The size of corpora forces them to be kept
on disks. The in-memory data bases are unacceptable for larg corpora.
They would also require the data of a dictionary to be kept mostly in the
operational memory, which is not needed (in most cases only a fraction
of the data is used at the same time). That's why a storage facility which minimizes the
number of disk reads was designed. The Ruby interface facilitates it's usage.

== REQUIREMENTS:

* Ruby 1.9
* RubyInline
* english
* ActiveModel
* bsearch
* Berkeley DB

== INSTALL

1. Install Berkeley DB

  http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/database/berkeleydb/downloads/index.html

2. Install rod gem from rubygems:

  gem install rod

== TROUBLESHOOTING


=== db.h problem

If you get the following error:

  error: db.h: No such file or directory

then you don't have Berkeley DB installed or its header fiels are not available
on the default path. Make sure that the library is installed and the headers
are available.


=== symbol lookup error related to Berkeley DB

If you get the following error:

  .ruby: symbol lookup error: /home/vagrant/.ruby_inline/... undefined symbol: db_env_create

then you have to provide system-specific linker information. By default the library
is linked with '-ldb' linker flag. To change it you have to set up ROD_BDB_LINK_FLAGS
environment variable, e.g.

   ROD_BDB_LINK_FLAGS='-ldb-4.8'
   export ROD_BDB_LINK_FLAGS

This configuration option will select the libdb-4.8.so library.

=== symbol lookup error not related to Berkeley DB

If you get the follwing error (or other lookup error):

  symbol lookup error:
  /net/people/plgapohl/.ruby_inline/...  undefined symbol: __intel_avx_rep_memcpy

then make sure that you don't have any compiled shared objects linking to objects that are no longer
available in your system. Remove any libraries from the .ruby_inline by:

  rm -f /net/people/plgapohl/.ruby_inline/*

== BASIC USAGE:

 class MyDatabase < Rod::Database
 end

 class Model < Rod::Model
   database_class MyDatabase
 end

 class User < Model
   field :name, :string
   field :surname, :string, :index => :hash
   field :age, :integer
   has_one :account
   has_many :files
 end

 class Account < Model
   field :email, :string
   field :login, :string, :index => :hash
   field :password, :string
 end

 class File < Model
   field :title, :string, :index => :hash
   field :data, :string
 end

 MyDatabase.instance.create_database("data")
 user = User.new(:name => 'Fred',
                 :surname => 'Smith',
                 :age => 22)
 account = Account.new(:email => "fred@smith.org",
                       :login => "fred",
                       :password => "password")
 file1 = File.new(:title => "Lady Gaga video")
 file2.data = "0012220001..."
 file2 = File.new(:title => "Pink Floyd video")
 file2.data = "0012220001..."

 user.account = account
 user.files << file1
 user.files << file2

 user.store
 account.store
 file1.store
 file2.store
 MyDatabase.instance.close_database

 MyDatabase.instance.open_database("data")
 User.each do |user|
   puts "Name: #{user.name} surname: #{user.surname}"
   puts "login: #{user.account.login} e-mail: #{user.account.email}"
   user.files.each do |file|
     puts "File: #{file.title}"
   end
 end

 User[0]                           # gives first user
 User.find_by_surname("Smith")     # gives Fred
 User.find_all_by_surname("Smith") # gives [Fred]
 File[0].user                      # won't work - the data is not normalized

== DEVELOPMENT

You'll need bundler installed:

  gem install bundler

Then you have to fetch all the dependencies:

  bundle

To run all the test simple type rake:

  rake

This might take several minutes, since for each scenario a whole set of C files
have to compiled and linked. 

During development you should watch your ~/.ruby_inline directory. If there
are thousands of files there, you should fill a bug, since most of them should
be automatically destroyed.

If you want to implement a feature/fix a bug, first be sure that it is 
documented on the bug tracker: https://github.com/apohllo/rod/issues.
Then be sure to write tests covering the added feature/fixed bug. 
Include the tests in Rakefile, run the tests and if everything is fine
send me a pull request.

== BENCHMARKS:

There is a separate project available under http://github.com/apohllo/rod-benchmark
that shows how ROD behave compared to the other storage engines.
It should be noted that this benchmarks are biased towards the design goals
of ROD. So don't expect general purpose database tests.

== LICENSE:

(The MIT/X11 License)

Copyright (c) 2008-2012 Aleksander Pohl

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
'Software'), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

== FEEDBACK

* mailto:apohllo@o2.pl
